The Joe Rogan experience. It's such a, an, an interesting time capsule.
When you look at these films, when you look at something like,
like nosferrato from 1922,
and then you look at what we're doing today with CGI in a lot of ways. I mean,
I'm not a fan of CGI. I'm not a fan of it in terms of, uh,
like for monsters, Mon, it just seems, everything seems fake.
There's the suspension of disbelief is higher than if I'm like what you did with
American war Wolf in London. What, one of,
one of the more brilliant things about it was the special effects and the makeup
were fantastic, but there were these really quick scenes. It was like,
you saw it for a second and it was burned into your eyes then,
and then it vanished.
Yeah. Well, what John Landus said to me is that I'm,
I'm never gonna really show the warwol for more than a couple seconds. Mm.
And I hardly even wanna show it then, you know? Right.
And what was great about warwol working on that film with John Landis was he,
you know, said, you're the expert. I want a fourlegged hound from hell.
I wanted to make a BIED Warwolf, you know, we argued about it.
And it was basically, you know, he wins he's the director, you know,
but he says, fourlegg at homeund from hell, make it. And I did. I mean,
the first sculpture was what the final thing became same with everything in it,
the Nazi demons, all that stuff. Mm. You know, cut to, you know,
like when I did the Wolf, man, I mean, I did thousands of designs and,
and you know, all these producers are going, well,
maybe if you do one between this and that, a and do one between this and that.
And or maybe this PO should be over here, you know,
and that kind of stuff just is so soul sucking, you know? Yeah.
And it's one of the reasons I retired, you know, I just, and, but to this day,
I mean, like on the, on the cover of my, my book is, uh, the sculpture from, uh,
of the, one of the Nazi demons from American Warwolf and,
and a number of people said, this is like,
like one of the greatest designs ever, you know, and this kinda stuff. And it's,
uh, people who are production designers and stuff,
and it was it's pure Rick B baker without interference. Right. You know, and,
and that's what I thought the industry would be, you know? Right.
Which it isn't <laugh> for the most part, you know? Well.
It's just, everybody wants to, it's the same with comedy.
It's the same with it's seems like it's the same with everything.
Everybody wants to put their greasy little fingerprints on it and, and say,
that's the reason why his nose is like, that was me. Yeah. I,
I told Rick B bakerker, you don't know what you're doing. Yeah.
You gotta make the nose wider. Yeah, no.
I know. Yeah. That's uh, and it's, you know, it's watered,
watered down the designs. Yeah. Like I said, it's soul sucking. I mean, if,
and when, you know, you know, sculptures take a long time and, you know,
we sculpted every pour and every wrinkle and everything, you know,
I have like magnifying glasses I wear when I'm doing this. And after you spend,
you know, hours and, and sleepless nights doing it,
and then some guy who doesn't know, he's talking about comes in and says, well,
you know, why don't you do this? You know, it's.
Well, they're disturbing your artistic vision. It's just, it's its, I mean,
when someone contributes money and they're the ones who get to decide whether
things get made or not, maybe, you know, just,
they think they're artistic as well. Yeah. It becomes.
A disaster. And it's the thing, you know, I mean,
when you see a movie or a TV show, another there's 47 producers on yeah.
You know, it used to be,
they were show people mm-hmm <affirmative> and there was a guy that, you know,
for example, on gremlins too, Mike fannell, who was the producer, the, uh,
who came from Roger Corman, uh, school of filmmaking, you know?
So he really checks every penny mm-hmm <affirmative>,
but he was a guy I could go to and he'd go what? He,
he would look at everything. He'd go, why is it, why is this,
why are you buying this? And you'd explain it to him and he'd go, okay,
that makes sense.
And there'd be a person you could talk to and you could get an answer from it.
Now there's like I said, 47 producers and nobody will commit to anything,
you know? And it's, it drove me crazy. And you know, I mean, I, I,
it was, I, I did make it because I loved it. And I, I was,
I feel so fortunate that my hobby in my profession and he did well and got
awards for it and stuff and for something I would do for free, you know,
but it got to the point where I, I,
I was just becoming a bitter old man because of all this. And I just said, yeah,
I have to retire. And I wanna make things for myself while I still can,
you know, I'm almost 69 years old and, you know,
having trouble with joints and vision and all kinds of stuff,
mm-hmm <affirmative>, you know, and,
and I I'd be off if I was working on some movie for some producer that
didn't know what he was talking about and, and screwed up my work, you know?
So it mess with your head. Yeah. So it's time to just, you know,
make my own thing and I'm, I'm loving it, you know what, and.
When you look back, like what was the first thing that you did where you like,
okay, that was a good.
One. Well, you know, it's funny once you do something and you look at it,
you see all the things that are wrong with it, you know? And, and I always say,
I wish I could see the film before I make this stuff,
because so many times the thing that's supposed to be the most important thing
isn't and something that you like threw together is all of a sudden the most
important thing. Mm. You know, I mean, I, I mean,
American Marvel was probably the one where, uh, I mean,
that's one that really put me on the map. I mean,
a lot of people say king Kong was, but, um, uh, American war, you know, I,
I looked at it and I thought, well, that's pretty cool, you know,
but I also went, God, I wish we did this. And I wish I do. You know,
I didn't do that. You know?
And I see so many things that I would do differently now. Yeah.
That movie's a masterpiece. Uh, it, it's a great film and it's a great film.
I mean, and I, my second film was schlock, which was John Landis's first film.
Ah, uh, I was 20 and he was 21. And I had,
again,
I think I had six weeks and I think I had a thousand dollars again to make John
play the schlockros.
I don't know if you've ever seen schlock ever saw that's that's another one you
gotta watch. <laugh> uh, low budget, you know, movie shot by a kid, basically,
you know, um, with a, you know, and he, like I said, he played this.
It was based. Have you ever seenrog yes. Joan Crawford. Yes. Yeah. Yes.
He sawrog. And couldn't believe that they made this movie.
So he was making like a joke, a joke version of schlock. He, you know, um, uh,
uh, and, uh, he wanted to play this eight man character and it's like, well,
okay. You know, but you're gonna be the director too. So, you know,
he had to be on set at six in the morning,
whether schlock worked or not all made up, you know,
know mm-hmm <affirmative> and it was shot in three weeks.
And John and I were going on two hour sleep a night, you know, he,
I would make him up. We were out in AUR, uh, at,
at where it used to be an Oakwood school where John went for a while and think
it was thrown out of, uh,
and we lived and worked in this like screen in patio, uh,
that was left over in this dilapidinated building.
And I was making up John on a bar stool,
and eventually he was like falling asleep and doing those, you know, that thing,
you know, and I'd have to grab him, but he, for some reason,
they were doing the dailies at, at MGM.
So we would have to go from a after 12 hour day of filming and, you know,
hour moving the makeup, we'd get in the car, drive MGM,
look at the previous days, dailies drive back sleep for two hours, get up,
start again, you know, oh my God. And it was during a heat wave and aura.
And the first day John, uh, uh, had the suit on all day and I was like,
calming it and brushing it. And the hair was just falling out in handfuls.
And I went, oh my God. Then my, my second film in my careers over. And,
and I would stay up all night with a hair drive trying to dry the suit out so I
could gloomer hair on it. You oh. Uh, but it it's,
it's actually kind of a cool makeup in, in, in, in kind of a fun character,
you know, and John had already written American WWOL and he said,
my next film's gonna be American. W he wrote that by the time he was 21,
he was 20 when he wrote it. Wow. Yeah. And he goes, it's gonna be my next film.
And he said, I want to do it, try ation in a way that never been done before.
It doesn't make sense to me that a man changing in his body,
going through this metamorphosis would sit in a chair like aloncheney junior and
be still until he finished changing. He goes, I think it would be painful.
And I want him to be able to move and I wanna show the pain and you know,
how would you do that? And I go, I have no idea, but I would love to, you know,
cuz we both love those transformation scenes, you know.
Pull that transformation scene up. The,
the initial transformation scene is so awesome. Cuz I,
I remember seeing it in the theater. What year was.
This? 1981. I think.
I was okay. So I was 14 years old.
I was in high school and I remember seeing this in was movie theater and this
was another one that sort of cemented the idea that, uh, I wanted to be a,
a makeup artist when he pulls all his clothes off and he is burning up and then
he looks at his hand, uh, and his hand starts stretching out.
Like that was incredible. Well, this was just such a different wearwol too.
Like everything about it was different. Yeah.
Well again, and, and I credit John for that and he also said, you know,
I wanna do it in a brightly lit room. It's not gonna have horror film lighting.
It's gonna be real. You know, how did you do this? How did you do the hand?
It's uh, we called it a changeo hand. It was actually a fake hand.
We storyboarded the whole sequence and that's a different fake hand there.
That's a second one. Right. And that's another one there.
It's got syringes in it that we pump.
Now he's wearing an appliance hand that matches let see. Um,
and we story about the whole sequence. And as you saw him,
when David first took off his clothes, he's not very hairy. Right. And I said,
for me to glue a little bit of hair on,
and then we do him a little hairrier and a little hairrier it,
it's better for us to work in reverse.
Let me do 'em in the hairt first and now pull hair off and trim it. Oh,
interesting. Yeah, but we boarded the whole thing out. So,
and this hair growing was reverse. Uh, I,
I punched hair through rubber and then pulled it through and we reverse printed
it. So it looked like it was, oh,
this is a whole fake back again with things coming out of it. That's a good,
so you punched.
Hair through over and pulled it through. Yeah. Like this and then reversed it.
So then it grows out like that. Oh, oh wow. Um.
But what I,
we thought what would be the most impactful thing would be for his face to
change last, but what I don't like about the transformation, like here,
the Wolf has a big, main of hair, so he's got this big,
hairy neck that I don't like. Yeah. You know, and it's, you know, uh,
and that's David doesn't have lenses and his eyes were just there,
red from that was a 10 day really of.
Makeup. Uh, so just exhausted and with makeup on. Yeah.
This was incredible meant. That's crazy that he doesn't have any eyes.
He doesn't have anything in his eyes. Yeah. That's just his eyes. Yeah. Holy.
Um, but yeah, this is the first stage change ahead. So this is a,
a rubber head that had mechanisms that push it out, you know? Uh,
and this is a second stage change ahead. Uh, it just stretches out like that.
And the thing that was interesting, cuz I mean, I, I was 30 when I did this.
It was at a time when there weren't people that did this kind of work. Uh,
there just a few in Hollywood, you know,
like John Chambers who did plent of the apes. But for me to find a crew,
I hired kids that sent me fan mail <laugh> I was a kid,
a kid from Texas that sent me fan mail, another kid from Connecticut.
And they were like 18. Wow. I mean,
I had a crew of like basically 18 year olds and me, it was like,
I think six of us, uh, who did this film, you know, 30, however many years ago.
I'm not good at math. Um, and still looks pretty decent, you know.
Awesome. <laugh> not just pretty decent. I mean,
there's a reason why I have the American,
wearol the pat McGee version of it sitting there in the front. Yeah.
But now I have to call pat and tell 'em the legs are off. <laugh> what's wrong.
With the legs. They're too stretched out in too long. It, uh, you know,
we actually,
that was the problem cuz I didn't know how I was gonna make this four-legged
Wolf work. Yeah. And uh, thought, well, I'll figure out something and it,
and it came to me one night. I thought, I remember as a kid, uh,
you ever do that wheelbarrow race thing where somebody holds your feet and
you're walking on your hands, you know, I thought mm-hmm <affirmative> well,
if we do something like that and have like puppetetered legs in the back mm-hmm
<affirmative> so if the reality is, if you really see the,
the full Wolf there's feet sticking out of his, he's got uh,
two legs sticking out. But we had,
'em like on a platform with wheel and the back legs were puppeteiered with
little rods, you know? So you never, you know,
the back and the back legs come in. That's when you cut, you know,
<laugh> right, right, right.
And a lot of the stuff like inpicly circus and the big bus crash and stuff. Yes.
That's me a wheelchair with a, with a head with John pushed me down the street.
Wow. Just.
You know, that was a great scene. God, that was a great scene. Yeah. Oh,
and wwolf comes of the, the, the, the porn theater.
Porn theater. Yeah.
Which the fights.
The guy in the head that script, I think was the only script that, uh,
I've worked on in my entire career,
that the script that I read was basically the script we made.
The only difference was when John wrote the script originally, uh,
that Aero cinema, uh, in, in piccadly circus was a cartoon cinema.
Oh. And in the original script, it was a cartoon cinema. But when we got there,
it was a porno cinema. So he changed that scene, you know, to a porno cinema.
Other than that,
it's the SA the script is basically verbatim what he wrote as a 20 year old and
his use of music and everything was groundbreaking at the time.
People didn't do like the way he did, you know, and.
His friend that kept returning Jack more RO more and more rotten every
time. Like that was a genius idea as well. Yeah.
Like that Jack had explained to him like, Hey man, you gotta kill yourself.
You're warol if you're gonna kill a bunch of people. Yeah.
Like it was so everything about it was so unique, it was a,
it completely Ely flipped the whole idea of what a Wherewolf movie was on its
head. Yeah. And.
And, and it worked, you know, and, and Griffin who, who played Jack,
when I first made him up in that makeup, uh, he,
as I was putting the stuff on, you know, in the makeup chair,
he's kinda like getting more and more sad and like sinking down in the chair
and, and it's like, what's wrong, Griffin is something wrong. And he goes,
look at me, you know? And I go, yeah. And he goes, uh, look at me,
this is my big break. And I, I mean, I, you, my throats torn out and I mean,
nobody's gonna look at me, you know? And it's like, did you read the script?
Yeah. Didn't it say your throat was torn out. Yeah. He goes, but I DIDNT,
I didn't think it would look like this. And he go, I did <laugh>, you know,
's what John thought it should. He was bummed out. Well, he was at first,
you know, um, cuz it is it's disturbing to see, you know, but it's a great role.
Yeah. No. And he was brilliant and he, he was terrific to work with, you know,
but the initial shock of seeing himself torn up right.
Was it was hard for him to take, you know, this's so realistic. Yeah. But,
but he, you know, I thought, okay, I gotta call John was in England. Um,
he scouting locations. And uh, so I said, you know, you gotta talk to Griffin,
he's, you know, kind of upset about what he looks like, you know? And <laugh>,
uh, but you know, I took that opportunity, uh,
being the sensitive guy that I am to tell him that the third part of his
transformation was he, it was actually gonna be a puppet.
It wasn't gonna really gonna be him because he was supposed to become,
be basically talking skeleton. Right. You know,
and the makeup process is an additive process and, and, you know,
he would have to be a huge skull to look right. You know,
and he wasn't too happy about that either, but I said,
but I want you to operate the mouth because you're doing the lips sink,
you know, you're, you're doing the voice and you, you know,
so he operated a puppet, but he, he turned out to be a great guy, you know, and,
and, and he, I thought he was brilliant in the film and, and you know,
the whole film.
You know, the film's amazing. And it's funny too. That's one,
one of the things that's interesting about the film, it's like, it's silly,
but horrific like the violence and the, the, the,
the explosive scenes of the warol ripping people apart.
But then some of it is hilarious.
Well, that whole sequence in the porno theater with all the dead people,
bloody pipe, I mean, when we were, when we were filming it, I was kind of going,
is this funny? <laugh>, you know, is this gonna work was.
Funny. Yeah. It was a welcome sort of comic relief from the,
the graphic horror of the, the wwolf tearing people apart. Yeah.
Yeah. And, you know, it's,
I think it's a brilliant film and it's a brilliant film and it changed my life.
I mean, I got my first Oscar for that film, you know, and, and, uh, I mean,
so fortunate to me that, that John came into my life and this,
this happened because of Don post studios that I talked about, uh, or I,
they made the Halloween masks. Um,
John was a male boy at Fox, uh, for a while.
And he knew John Chambers, he would deliver mail to the John Chambers.
He did the planet of the AVEs makeup.
And he talked to John Chambers at first about doing schlock. And John said,
well, I need, you know, $250,000 in the budget of the whole film,
I think was $30,000. You know? So, uh,
I think he just basically didn't wanna deal with this hyperactive kid, you know?
And so he sent him to Don post studios and Don post, uh, you know, said, well,
same thing. And they didn't really want to deal with his kid. And, and they had,
it would be way too much money, you know? Right. But they said,
there's a kid who comes in here and buys materials.
I used to go there to buy materials because in those days now there' are stores
that sell all the supplies that you need. Right.
That I used to have to drive all over California to get what I need and some
stuff they would only sell you in a 55 gallon drum, which I couldn't afford,
you know, like polyurethan polyurethane foam,
which is a two part foam that foams up, uh, chemically reaction, foams it up,
makes sign, had gas when it foams, which nobody told me <laugh>, you know,
but Don post would, you know, pour him in a, can you go, here you go, kid.
You know? And first time I used it in my bedroom, I, I practically died.
<laugh> really, yeah. And I have a real strong, I, it,
I have a very strong allergic reaction to it now when it, um, because of that.
Yeah. Wow. Yeah. I mean, my throat closed up. I could hardly breathe and whoa,
and I didn't know what was going on. And I found out what it was,
but Don can sci Jesus. Yeah. But because of that, because I left that,
that's the only time in my life. I actually had a business card, you know,
and John says, you know, it said Rick B baker monster maker,
but I think it said, Rick B baker makeup artist, you know,
but I gave a card and some pictures to Don post.
And when they were trying to get rid of this kid who wanted a funky gorilla suit
thing, you know, they said, well, this guy's made some gorilla suits.
Why don't you talk to him? Oh. And John lived in Westwood, uh,
near the cemetery there, the veteran cemetery. And he had drove out to covinna.
And again, I was still pretty shy at that point in my bedroom at that point was,
you know, I had,
I slept on a convertible sofa cuz I had gotten enough money to buy one.
And so I could fold it up and have more floor space to work,
but my masks and my had work tables everywhere, you know? And,
and John is very loud and, and, and, and, uh, hyperactive and,
and he was coming in and he was flipping out over the stuff that I made,
you know, and like touching it and stuff. And I'm going, oh, you know,
it's like this, guy's in my room. He's touching my, and it is really scaring me,
you know, but I mean, thank God. I mean, American WOL, you know,
put me on the map. And I mean, I, I,
I did coming to America and my introduction to, to Eddie Murphy was, you know,
and I did a lot of films with Eddie and because of John,
I actually met my wife Sylvia on, on a John Landis film, um,
where he had me play a, um, originally it was a, uh, Jesus freak.
It was a film called into the night and it was all filmed at night. And we,
and met my wife on Hollywood Boulevard in front of Frederick's the Hollywood,
uh, in the middle of the night and turned out I,
they changed it to a dope dealer.
I was playing a dope dealer and Sylvia was the hair stylist on the film.
And John came in and says, I want you to be in the movie.
I want you to play the part you were born to play a. You know,
so my wife was a in the background, you know, uh, and there's a picture of us.
It's in, in the book actually on the night we met in front of Fred's,
Holly would, uh, oh, that's cool. And you know,
now we have two amazing children and, and, uh, and, and a great life. And,
you know, I owe John.
A lot. Well, you and John made magic. He really did. I mean, that,
that movie was so good. You know, and as we said,
one of the things about that film is it's,
it was so strategic in its use of the Warwolf. Mmhmm <affirmative> you know,
that you, you really, when you got a chance to see it,
like one of my favorite scenes was when the guy,
the businessman is in the subway, mm-hmm <affirmative>,
and he's running away from the WOL and you know, it's chasing him,
but you don't see it. Mm.
And you don't see it until he's stumbling on the escalator.
And then you see it at the bottom of the escalator, just for a second, second,
just walking into the frame, just walking into the frame. And you're like. Yeah.
And they cut.
Right before he see his feet sticking out his with the,
that was the thing with the design of the world as well.
Cuz because John said he wasn't gonna show it. I normally you would,
when you do something, that's gonna be an animattronic charact.
You kind of sculpted in a neutral position and you let the mechanism, uh,
make the expressions. But uh,
from my experience in other films,
the editor doesn't necessarily choose moment where you think it's the best
expression, you know? Mm. And I thought if it's only gonna be on for a second,
I want it to be scary looking.
So I sculpted in a scary expression on it, which I normally wouldn't do.
Uh, I just, so there was no way that it wasn't gonna look scary when we saw it.
Right, right.
Right. Snarling. Yeah.
I.